---
layout: post
title: Ending Plagiarism One Paper at a Time
subtitle: How Giving purpose to College Papers Can Fight Plagiarism
bigimg: /img/papers.jpg
---

#### TL;DR: By making college student's available to those other than the professor, colleges can decrease the prevalence of plagiarism on campus.

While almost everyone can agree that plagiarism is a major issue, and a growing one at that, there are few people in the process of orchestrating a revolutionary solution. Almost every college, high school, workplace, etc. attacks plagiarism from one of two front; relying on either morality or fear of punishment to deter plagiarism. From the moral side we see colleges implementing honor codes, and thus relying on the good morals of the students to themselves curb plagiarism. The other popular method is to write up regulations about plagiarism, accordingly punishing those who break these rules. While both of these approaches may seem logical, neither one is perfect, rather they are far from it.

When colleges attempt to stifle plagiarism, and cheating in general, with the implementation of an honor code, they do so hoping the that the morality of the student population will keep plagiarism at bay. While there may be a large majority of the campus that abides by the honor code, this does not mean that the honor code is any more efficient than traditional sets of rules, as there are many  issues that work against the honor code. In her article "Academic Integrity and Student Plagiarism", Susan D. Blum mentions student solidarity as one of these issues. This becomes an issue because many honor codes rely on the student population to police itself, but not everyone is willing to call someone else out, even fewer when that someone is a friend, on an infraction of the honor code. This creates a major problem for the effectiveness of honor codes on college campuses, and it's a problem that cannot be easily addressed.

The second approach to dealing with plagiarism is to write up and strictly enforce a set of rules or regulations. This approach seems the make the most sense on paper, as you would think that will harsh enough punishments students would tend to shy away from plagiarism, but unfortunately the situation rarely plays out as such. This reason for this is fairly simple and in fact common. Take for example the fact that in the U.S. it is illegal for someone to drink if they are under the age of 21. Despite this it is very common, almost the expectation, for high school and college students to drink in at least some capacity before the age of 21. One reason for this, and this is especially prevalent in college, is that while the consequences are harsh, very few people actually believe there to be a high risk of getting caught and having to face those consequences. This is the same reason that setting regulations about plagiarism don't work to prevent plagiarism, for the students, whether or not they are right, do not perceive there to be a very high risk of them getting caught plagiarizing.

Now that it's clear the current systems for fighting plagiarism are not effective, it stands to reason that there is a solution out there. That reasoning is correct. To find that solution one must attack the root of the cause, the reason that plagiarism has become such a major issue. One of the major factors that contributes to the extent of plagiarism, is the fact that the true reasoning for citing sources becomes irrelevant with college papers. Almost any paper, aside from maybe a senior thesis, that is written during a student's time in college is seen only one or two people before being discarded and forgotten about. This vacuum eliminates a major benefit of citation, the ability for others to read and track down the sources that the original author used. In order to beat back plagiarism this is the issue that needs to be addressed, or plagiarism will simply continue to be a part of college culture. So, how does it get fixed?

The best way to go about reducing plagiarism would be remove the vacuum that college writing currently resides in. One way that this could be achieved is by implementing a system into which professors would upload students papers. Through this system other students at the college would be able to search through this database of papers for similar topics that other students have written on. There are multiple advantages that this system would allow for. The first is more accountability. Because students' work would be going into this system for others to read, they would have a greater incentive not to plagiarize in the first place, for there are more people to catch them. The second benefit is the ability for students to follow and use the sources that others before them have. For some papers it can be very difficult to find respected, scholarly articles for a specific topic, but with this data base of former students' papers, students would more easily be able to find sources for topics of certain classes. Lastly, it could be up to the professors to actually allow students to cite past papers by former students, in their current papers, giving those currently taking the class a broader range of available resources.

While this system has many benefits it certainly has some drawbacks that could be pointed out. The first of which is the technology itself. It could be argued that there would be too steep a learning curve for some of the less tech savvy professors on campus to able to figures out how to upload the papers. To this we find the solution in the students. The college could add a work study job for students who would have the job of uploading the papers to the system, and all the professors would have to do is email the documents over and the students would upload them. Another possible argument against would be that some students wouldn't want to have their work put out for the whole college to read. A simple solution here would be a allow students to opt to have the author listed as anonymous, or even to not the list the names of the authors at all. Their paper would still be uploaded, and could be kept track of somewhere, and this way the sense of accountability is still there, but the students privacy is respected. Lastly, if students wanted to cite others students papers, professors could have some issues with the standard of writing of some papers in the database. For this the college could implement a simple rubric to quickly and easily show the strength of the writing, without showing everyone the grade the student received. For example, lets say the college writes a rubric with 3 different distinctions shown in the system with green, yellow, and red dots next to the name of the paper. A professor could say that any paper with a green marking is fair to cite. These marking could either be assigned by the professors themselves when grading, or could possibly be done by writing consultants.

Plagiarism has become one of the most pressing issues on many college and high school campuses. Recently honor codes have been popping up to try and combat plagiarism, but rarely are they any more successful then traditional methods. By eliminating the root cause, and allow students access the other students writing, colleges can increase accountability, and provide students with even more resources to better their writing.



 Blum, Susan D. "Academic Integrity and Student Plagiarism: A Question of Education, Not Ethics." The Chronicle of Higher Education. N.p., 20  Feb. 2009. Web. 21 Apr. 2017. <http://www.chronicle.com/article/Academic-IntegrityStudent/32323>.

<a title="Papers" href="https://flickr.com/photos/foto_mania/16263117970">Papers</a> flickr photo by <a href="https://flickr.com/people/foto_mania">foto_mania</a> shared under a <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/2.0/">Creative Commons (BY-NC-ND) license</a>
