---
layout: post
title: How Your GPS Obsession Effects the Rest of Your Life
subtitle: The effects of relying on the map in your pocket
bigimg: /img/GPS.jpg
---

As the use of smartphones has increased over the last decade so too has the use of GPS apps such as Google Maps, Waze, or MapQuest. No longer are the days of scanning over the huge state road map to find your next turn, or exit, for now we have step by step instructions for how to get from point A to point B the most efficient way possible, but does it come at a price? Does relying on simple step by step instructions reduce our ability to navigate our surroundings on our own? The simple answer is yes, but why?

As we have become more reliant on step by step instructions from a GPS, we have subsequently become less reliable on using our brain's own ability to navigate by itself. Prior to the widespread use of GPS our brains would essentially make a mental map of our surroundings, remembering landmarks along the way. This is called spatial navigation and was how humanity had always navigated its surroundings, but GPS changed all that. When people navigate with GPS they tend not to pay attention to their surroundings, for they are mindlessly following instructions from the GPS. Because of this we don't remember as much, if anything, about the surroundings of the trip that they just took. This inability to navigate with the use of GPS can affect people everyday with our driving, for if someone only knows the route the they repeat day in and day out, they will have less room to be flexible if they encounter something like construction work, or an accident. While being unable to swiftly avoid traffic may be annoying, if is far from the most dangerous effect of relying on a GPS.

Along with affecting our ability to effortlessly navigate our way to work, a GPS reliance can affect your life in many other ways. One simple example of ways our brains use spatial mapping would be a waiter bringing food to a table. When first taking the orders the waiter creates a mental map of the table in order to remember who ordered what later on. While inability to use spatial mapping in other parts of our lives is certainly not a positive effect on GPSs it is not by far the most concerning. No, the most concerning possible effect of extensive GPS use is earlier onset of diseases such as dementia.The reasoning for this comes back to this process of spatial navigation. The part of the brain responsible for spatial navigation is called the hippocampus, along with navigation the hippocampus is also responsible for storing information in short-term and long-term memory. In a 2000 study published by neuroscientist Eleanor Maguire, it was shown that London taxi cab drivers had more grey matter in their hippocampi than those who were not cab drivers (taxi drivers in London spend 2-3 years studying the roads of London using spatial navigation and use no GPS assistance) (Neyfakh). While there may be any advantage to having larger hippocampi, other than being able to brag to your friends maybe, there can certainly be significant disadvantages, as it has been shown that having small hippocampi can put you at risk for mental diseases such as dementia, schizophrenia, and PTSD (Neyfakh).

I have to apologize at this point for possibly scaring you into thinking that you are doomed to be a 45 year old stuck with the disease that you thought only REALLY old people could ever get, so before you smash your GPS, or phone, with a hammer keep this in mind. While excessive GPS use has been shown to cause things that in turn, have been shown to correlate with these diseases, this is by no means a guarantee of one's future mental health. In the case that you are an avid GPS user who can’t drive for 30 seconds before getting lost, fret not, there is still time for you to correct your ways and make that hippocampus something to be proud of. It has been suggested that instead of using a GPS to navigate everywhere all the time, use it sparingly. For example, maybe the first 1-3 times that you drives somewhere you use the GPS, but still pay attention to your surroundings to get an understanding of where you are going. After that you can either go without the GPS or, as I like to do, keep the GPS up, but turn the speaker off so that you can drive without looking at it, and then if you forget a turn or get lost, you don’t have to fumble around for a map or your phone to get back on track.

GPSs have become part of everyday life for many people now, and as is with much technology there is very little that we really know about the true effects that it has on our lives. In the case of the GPS, as long as you keep your use for unfamiliar routes, and don’t rely on the device, you should be able to avoid rooming with grandma at the nursing home down the street.

Neyfakh, Leon. "Do Our Brains Pay a Price for GPS?" BostonGlobe.com. N.p., 18 Aug. 2013. Web. 23 Feb. 2017. <https://www.bostonglobe.com/ideas/2013/08/17/our-brains-pay-price-for-gps/d2Tnvo4hiWjuybid5UhQVO/story.html>.



<a title="GPS" href="https://flickr.com/photos/richy/3857011320">GPS</a> flickr photo by <a href="https://flickr.com/people/richy">Richy!</a> shared under a <a href="https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/2.0/">Creative Commons (BY-NC) license</a> </small>
